Intro.

Welcome to Virtual Skiddaw
Welcome to the Skiddaw landscape, a virtual chunk of the northern English Lake District for you to explore, on the ground or from the air.  Browse through the map overlays, cruise around the whole area, or dip down to visit geological sites for detailed observations on the geology.  View the rocks at all scales from a field sketch down to a slide under the microscope.
But before you begin your investigations you need to dress for the occasion, picking up some vital (virtual) equipment to take with you.


Equipment selection
Select your equipment from the table: the rucksack, food, water and grain-size chart are mandatory, and you can select 5 other optional items
You can deselect optional items by clicking their icon at the top of the screen, but you cannot do this for mandatory items.  Each item can also be selected using a keyboard shortcut letter.


Entering tutorial
If this is your first time in Virtual Skiddaw please take time to go through the tutorial. If you do not wish to go through the tutorial click on the skip button.

Tutorial model
This tutorial will guide you in steps on how to use the navigation panel and how to move your avatar.
Step 1 - Turning left and right.
Step 2 - Moving forward and back.
Step 3 - Flying up and down.
Step 4 - The navigation panel.
During the tutorial you will be restricted to this small area.

Turning
To turn from side to side, use the left and right arrow keys. Try it now.

Walking
To walk forwards and backwards, use the up and down arrow keys. Try it now.

Flying
To fly and land, use the Page-Up and Page-Down keys. Try it now.
(Your maximum flying height is limited.)

Navigation panel
The Regional context options let you bring up different overlays, look at the area from different angles, teleport (jump) to other sites and show the compass and minimap. [keyboard shortcut: Q]
The Task list is used at each site as a check-list of what you need to do; it is only active whilst you are at a site.  You are free to complete the tasks in any order, ticking each off as you go.  [keyboard shortcut: W]
The Controls options allow you to modify your view, adjust the speed of the interface response for various actions, and exit the environment. [keyboard shortcut: E]

Navigation panel - Regional contxt options
The Regional context options provide the following functions (keyboard shortcuts in brackets):
'Perspectives' buttons allow you to overlay the ground with:
 * The aerial photography of the terrain [T]
 * The 1:25,000 Ordnance Survey map [O]
 * A geological map [G]
Raising a cross-section through the terrain. [R]
Bird's-eye or Top view [Z], switching to fixed oblique views of the terrain as a whole [X] [C] [V] [B], or reverting to the avatar view. [N]
Showing each of the site locations: you then just click on a site's icon to jump to it. [V]
Displaying a mini-map to show where you are and a compass to help you navigate around. [M]

Navigation panel - Task list
The Task list is used at each site as a check-list of what you need to do, and is only active whilst you are at a site.  You are free to complete the tasks in any order, ticking each off as you go.
You MUST complete and tick all the tasks before leaving the site for the application to guide you to the next site.
In addition the panel provides the following function buttons, which will be enabled when appropriate to the site and tasks:
- 'Show sketch points'  will highlight suggested points for sketching the exposure. Click again to hide the highlights. [S]
- 'Highlight rock'  will highlight the hand specimen of rock/s. Walk over to a rock and click on it to inspect it. Click again to hide the rock highlight/s. [H]
- 'Open phase diagram'  will open a new web browser window, showing the phase diagram referenced in the task list. [D]

Navigation panel - Controls options
speed of the interface response for various actions, and exit the environment.
'Change to first person view'  changes your view so it matches what the avatar would see. While in first person view mode, you can look around more freely. Click again to return to third person view (from behind the avatar). [V]
The first slider adjusts how quickly you can look around when in first person view mode. [L]/[Shift-L]
Three further sliders allow you to adjust your speed of movement (walking [S]/[Shift-S], running [R]/[Shift-R] and flying [F]/[Shift-F]) in the environment. The maximum flying height varies round the environment, so you may find the oblique or birds eye aerial views are the best way to explore the overlay maps and cross-section.
In addition the options include a button to exit the application. [X]
This concludes the tutorial. Have fun!

Get ready
Please listen to or carefully read the following instructions. They contain important information that you will need in order to complete the required tasks.


Skiddaw
There are two main types of rock in the Skiddaw field area: a pile of sedimentary rocks known as the Skiddaw Group, and a single igneous rock, the Skiddaw granite, that intruded those sedimentary rocks around 400 million years ago. The Skiddaw Group was deposited on the seafloor of the Iapetus Ocean nearly half a billion years ago as a thick succession of mudstones, siltstones and gritty sandstones. These sediments were eroded from a small continent called Avalonia, which lay just to the south. 
Not long after the sediments were laid down, the Iapetus Ocean narrowed and then closed completely, as Avalonia collided with another continent called Laurentia, forming a range of mountains. The Skiddaw Group rocks were caught in the middle of this collision. They were deformed, buried several kilometres deep and gradually heated up. The mudstones changed into slates as a result of this regional metamorphism.
After the collision, molten rock rose from deep in the crust as magma and intruded the Skiddaw Group slates.  The magma cooled and crystallized, forming the Skiddaw Granite.  As the magma cooled, it lost heat into the nearby Skiddaw Group sedimentary rocks.  This heat caused new minerals to grow in the sedimentary rocks, a process known as contact metamorphism.
You can gather detailed evidence from exposures in this environment to explore:
- First, the effects of contact and regional metamorphism of the Skiddaw Group sedimentary rocks;
- Second, how the Skiddaw Group rocks were deformed during the mountain-building event.


Site 1 - Blease Fell Quarry
You have now arrived at Blease Fell Quarry. A short briefing on how to investigate this site will follow.


Site 1 - Blease Fell Quarry
This site, Site 1, is a small, disused quarry in the Skiddaw Group sedimentary rocks. How might you start investigating this exposure?
It's tempting to throw yourself straight at the rocks and start making observations of detailed features. But as the checklist for this site suggests, it's often more productive to stand back and observe the exposure as a whole first. Making a sketch in your notebook of the main features helps focus this exercise. This field sketch should be a fairly simple line drawing that picks out important geological structures such as the fine traces of slaty cleavage cutting across this exposure at a shallow angle. Don't forget to indicate the scale and orientation of your sketch.
Move up to the rock face to identify smaller-scale features such as colour variation, sedimentary and deformation structures, fossils, and perhaps even coarse crystals or detrital grains.  You may find a small rock specimen to pick up and examine close up.  Record any observations in your notebook, including small thumbnail sketches of specific features, and add further annotations and details to your sketch of the whole exposure. Look out for a chance to use the Virtual Microscope so you can describe microscopic textures in the rock.
As you record your observations, you may start to make interpretations about the rocks: what sort of rocks they are, which processes created or modified them, and whether they provide clues to past environments. When you record these interpretations in your notebook, make sure you distinguish them clearly from the factual observations you have made.


Instructions
Now examine the hand specimen in detail, as if with a hand lens.  You can rotate the rock round and over using the sliders or arrow keys, and zoom in and out.
You can also bring up a grain scale chart to assess the grain size of the rock by comparing the grains on the chart with the rock at full zoom. Note that the sizes and measurements on the chart are only accurate when fully zoomed in on the rock.  A ruler also appears beside the chart when the rock is at the appropriate scale, so you can measure other features of the specimen. Record any observations you make in your notebook.
There is a link to the Virtual Microscope so you can view the rock at the microscopic scale as well.  The microscope opens up in a separate browser window (but Virtual Skiddaw will remain open in the background).
Make notes and sketches in your notebook on any features you can see in the magnified or microscopic views.
Click on Finish when you are done.


Site 1 Blease Fell Quarry Task list
□ Sketch of overall exposure
□ Describe hand specimen of rock in your notebook
□ Describe microscopic aspects of rock in your notebook
□ Check the regional context of the site using the overlays
□ Relate observations to past geological processes


Summary of Site 1 - Blease Fell Quarry
The rocks here are fine-grained, medium to dark grey, weakly metamorphosed mudstones.  They have a fabric composed of numerous closely-spaced planar surfaces but no obvious colour banding, which suggests that this fabric is a fine planar cleavage rather than sedimentary bedding. The rocks could therefore be described as slates.  Fractures are common: many of these are steep joints, but some show striations that indicate minor slip surfaces.
The rocks lack many features you might find in other exposures, such as sedimentary structures, fossils, folds, or visible mineral crystals.  Even with the hand lens you would be lucky to pick out individual mineral grains in this fine-grained rock.
Sedimentary bedding is only easily visible under the microscope, as variations in grain size and colour. The cleavage also shows up, as fine dark lines cutting obliquely across the layering.  The sedimentary layering appears to be folded in places.  On a finer scale, the groundmass of the rock is composed mainly of mineral fragments, but modified by weak metamorphic recrystallization.
The tectonic cleavage is evidence that the rocks have been deformed, while there are only weak indications of metamorphic mineral growth that has not erased the cleavage.  A reasonable interpretation of this evidence is that these rocks have undergone regional metamorphism as a result of continental collision.  There are no signs of contact metamorphism from the Skiddaw Granite.  This is consistent with the fact that Site 1 lies a few kilometres from the nearest surface outcrop of the Skiddaw Granite on the geological map, and in the unaltered zone on the metamorphic zones map.



Site 2 - Blease Beck
You have now arrived at Blease Beck. A short briefing on how to investigate this site will follow.

Site 2 - Blease Beck
Site 2 lies within the outcrop of the same stratigraphic rock unit, the Kirk Stile Formation, as occurs at Site 1.  However, it also lies in a different metamorphic zone, the Spotted slate zone.  How do the rocks here differ from those at Site 1?
An exposure of broken rock dominates Site 2, which is littered with small pieces of rock.  The in situ rock by the side of the track is so heavily fractured that a sketch is not really worthwhile here. Instead, you will gain more insight by studying the textures of the rocks using the hand lens and the virtual microscope. Can you identify any metamorphic minerals or textures?  What about deformation fabrics?
Once you have made your observations, consider what implications they have for the history of these rocks.  For instance, you can constrain the pressure of metamorphism by seeing where any minerals you identify are stable on Phase Diagram 1.

Site 2 Blease Beck Task list
□ State the obvious difference between rocks at Site 1 and Site 2
□ Describe texture and mineralogy of rock under hand lens
□ Describe microscopic aspects of rock (texture, deformation, metamorphism)
□ Identify any evidence for contact memetamorphism
□ Determine maximum pressure of metamorphism by reference to Phase Diagram 1


Summary of Site 2 - Blease Beck
The main contrast with Site 1 is colour: some of the rocks here are reddish, while others have a greenish-grey hue. In many other respects the rocks are similar: fine-grained, and lacking obvious sedimentary layering at outcrop scale. You might be able to recognize traces of slaty cleavage.  The rocks are more fractured here, and the red colour commonly appears to be associated with fractures.
A closer look at the rocks reveals a striking texture of randomly-oriented, white prisms, a few centimetres long. Many of these crystals have rhombic or square end-sections with a dark, square centre. These are large crystals (porphyroblasts) of the metamorphic mineral andalusite that have grown in the metamorphosed mudstone.
Much harder to see are vague oval shapes, a few millimetres across, which are slightly paler than the groundmass of the rock. These are crystals of the metamorphic mineral cordierite.
Under the microscope, the randomly-oriented porphyroblastic texture is clear, though most of the crystals have actually been replaced by fine-grained masses of other minerals. The crystals of both minerals cut across the fine tectonic foliation in the groundmass.
The cleavage provides evidence for the deformation associated with mountain-building and continental collision, but this has been partially overprinted by much more pronounced metamorphic mineral growth.
The random orientation of the metamorphic crystals of andalusite and cordierite strongly suggests heating with no associated deformation, which is characteristic of contact metamorphism of rocks near a cooling igneous body.
Phase Diagram 1 indicates that andalusite is only stable at pressures below about 360 MPa, confirming that the contact metamorphism took place at relatively shallow crustal levels.

Site 3 - Roughton Gill Bridge
You have now arrived at Roughton Gill Bridge. A short briefing on how to investigate this site will follow.

Site 3 - Roughton Gill Bridge
The rocks at Site 3 belong to the same stratigraphic rock unit as those at Site 1 and Site 2: the Kirk Stile Formation. But we are no longer in the Spotted slate zone: Site 3 lies in the Hardened slate zone.
So what has changed in the rocks compared to those at Site 2 to justify placing these rocks in a different zone?
As with Site 2, a sketch is of limited use here, and the most helpful observations you can make will be on hand specimens or microscopic textures using the Virtual Microscope.
Are the metamorphic minerals here the same as at Site 2, or different? Can you find evidence for either sedimentary or tectonic structures?
Before you leave this site, consider the evidence you have gathered here in the context of the geological map of the area, and link your observations to the geological history of these Skiddaw Group rocks.
You can further constrain the conditions of metamorphism by reference to Phase Diagram 2.

Site 3 Roughton Gill Bridge Task list
□ Describe difference between rocks at Site 2 and these rocks.
□ Describe texture and mineralogy of rock under hand lens.
□ Describe microscopic aspects of rock.
□ Identify the two main metamorphic minerals at this locality.
□ Make a precise determination of pressure-temperture conditions using Phase Diagram 2.


Summary of Site 3 - Roughton Gill Bridge
The rocks at this site lack the reddening seen at Site 2, and are mainly medium to dark grey. On closer inspection, the white prismatic crystals of andalusite so abundant at Site 2 are much less common, replaced by prisms of a similar shape and size but dark grey in colour.
However, in many cases the only porphyroblasts visible are vague rounded patches of either slightly darker or lighter grey than the groundmass. Some of these are similar to the oval cordierite crystals at Site 2.
The general texture of the rocks is more granular that at Sites 1 and 2, with little evidence (if any) for the fine slaty cleavage. You may instead see some hints of centimetre-scale banding.
At low magnifications under the microscope, the rock shows bands of different colour and texture, even though the overall texture is granular. This strongly suggests that the banding corresponds to original sedimentary layers. The bands are disrupted by both paler and darker blotches.
At higher magnifications, the groundmass texture of randomly-oriented, interlocking grains can be made out; you might recognize the minerals biotite and quartz.
The numerous pale blobs are cordierite, many of them outlined by small biotite crystals. The irregular darker blotches are large porphyroblasts of andalusite, which appear riddled with holes; in fact the holes are grains of other minerals, mainly quartz, that were engulfed by the andalusite crystal as it grew.
The random, granular texture that has erased the tectonic cleavage is further evidence that contact metamorphism resulting from granite intrusion post-dated regional deformation and metamorphism in the Skiddaw Group.
A granular rock like this one where all other structures have been erased by contact metamorphism is known as a hornfels. Cordierite is present in these rocks, but garnet is not.
Referring to Phase Diagram 2, this implies that none of the cordierite has reacted to form garnet, so the pressures cannot have exceeded about 380400 MPa, depending on the temperature. This confirms the shallow depth of metamorphism deduced from the stability of andalusite.

Site 4 - Large waterfall, Sinel Gill
Two different rock types are exposed at this site: one is generally pale and crumbly, while the other, a hard, splintery rock, occurs in different shades of grey.
Explore the locality, describing each rock type in terms of its texture and mineralogy.
Contrast the different textures you see by making small sketches of typical specimens. Dont forget to check the microscopic textures of both rock-types.
How do your observations here add to the geological story of this area?
