Site 1

Task list for Site 1
Complete the following tasks while exploring Site 1.

Make a sketch of the overall exposure.
Describe the hand specimen of rock in your notebook.
Describe the microscopic aspects of rock in your notebook.
Check the regional context of the site using the overlays.
Relate your observations to past geological processes.

Sketch points for Site 1
Stand at one of the sketch points listed below and face in the direction indicated to complete a sketch for this site.

Sketch Point 1: turn to face ENE
Sketch Point 2: turn to face ESE
Sketch Point 3: turn to face NE
Sketch Point 4: turn to face N.



Site 2

Caption for figure
Phase Diagram 1 for use at Site 2. Abbreviations: Mu = muscovite mica; Q = quartz; AF = alkali feldspar; H2O = water. Al2SiO5 is the composition of the minerals kyanite, andalusite and sillimanite, which are known as ‘polymorphs’ of aluminosilicate.

Task list for Site 2
State the most obvious difference between the rocks at Site 1 and Site 2.
Describe the texture and mineralogy of the rock under the hand lens.
Describe the microscopic aspects of the rock (texture, deformation, metamorphism).
Identify any evidence for contact metamorphism.
Determine the maximum pressure of metamorphism by reference to Figure 52.1.
Sketch point for Site 2
Sketch Point 1: turn to face NE.


Site 3

Task list for Site 3
Describe the difference between the rocks at Site 2 and these rocks.
Describe the texture and mineralogy of the rock under the hand lens.
Describe the microscopic texture of the rock.
Identify the two main metamorphic minerals at this locality.
Make a precise determination of the pressure–temperature conditions using Figure 52.2.
Sketch point for Site 3
Sketch Point 1: turn to face NNW.


Site 4

Task list for Site 4
Describe and identify the two rock types.
Contrast the texture and mineralogy of the two rock types in the hand specimens.
Contrast the texture and mineralogy of the two rock types under the microscope.
Sketch the texture of the rock type with layering.
Sketch points for Site 4
Sketch Point 1: turn to face E
Sketch Point 2: turn to face N
Sketch Point 3: turn to face ESE.

Site 5

Task list for Site 5
Make a labelled sketch of the north bank up to the small waterfall.
Identify the two rock types exposed in contact along the north bank and waterfall.
Describe the nature of the contact (sharpness, regularity).
Describe how these rock types are distributed at this site.
Which aluminosilicate should form in the country rock here? Use Phase Diagram 3 (Figure 52.3), and assume the granite magma was at 700 °C.
Sketch points for Site 5
Sketch Point 1: turn to face NE
Sketch Point 2: turn to face NNE
Sketch Point 3: turn to face NNE.

Site 6

Task list for Site 6
Sketch the exposure.
Describe any structural fabrics and features, then annotate your sketch.
Describe any other features (e.g. veins, bedding, intrusions).
Note any evidence of the relative ages of the features and fabrics.
Construct a timeline showing when the features formed relative to each other.
Study note
Many features at this site are difficult to spot and identify, even on a visit to the actual quarry, so try not to be disappointed if you cannot find them in the virtual environment. Make sure you do not spend much more than the suggested time on this site.

Sketch points for Site 6
Sketch Point 1: turn to face NNE
Sketch Point 2: turn to face NW
Sketch Point 3: turn to face NNW.


